Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbyville.
Dr. Rex Davis tells an incredible story of service that includes action in both World War II, where he was aboard an LCS during the invasion of Okinawa, and later his service as a medical doctor in Vietnam.
He served in the Navy, the Air Force, and the Army.
Between World War II and Vietnam, he returned home to Giddings, finished high school, college, and med school before starting his career as a doctor.
An accomplished writer, Dr. Davis has penned many of his accounts of service in the form of fascinating short stories.
We will read some of those as we visit with Dr. Rex Davis today on Veterans of the Valley.
Dr. Davis, it's an honor to know you and to have you here.
I want to go right into your action in World War II because I think it's a fascinating story, especially a day that you call your day of infamy, May 28th, 1945.
You were serving aboard LCS, Landing Craft Support.
Sort of talk about what happened that day and what led up to the kamikaze attack that you witnessed.
Go ahead, talk about it.
Well, we were reporting into the destroyer Drexler and...
We had been there previously and there had been some bad weather but today appeared to be a very pretty day so we figured that there might be a lot going on and as we approached the radar picket station which was about 50 miles north of Okinawa, I became aware of the fact that a
kamikaze suicide plane was headed for one of the ships.
It seemed to miss this ship but stumbled on and actually suicided into the Drexler, the destroyer that we were to report into.
The Drexler radioed us that they were sort of dead in the water.
They weren't going to sink immediately but they were
put out of action and asked us to get on up there.
And we went to a more moderate speed called full, head full.
And our ship was an amphibious craft and actually pushed more water it seemed than we were able to make headway on.
And it took us a little while to start
getting in their direction and while we were watching the situation, another suicide plane was headed for the Drexler and it seemed to miss and this suicide plane was being chased by two Corsairs in the air and they had it in his cross, they were
in his crossfire, but he skimmed over the Drexler and looked like it would splash into the water.
But it didn't.
It made a left banking turn and went up into the air and then came down directly onto the Drexler.
And I was topside.
It was my battle.
It was my duty during that...
battle stations to take care of the action and so I recorded the time and when the smoke cleared the valve was up on the Drexler and it was sinking very fast and it went down in 49 seconds.
Now the circumstances are that the destroyers carried crude
fuel.
And when it sank, this crude oil floated around and left a wide donut of oil.
The men that were immediately off the Drexler had to swim through this goo, this oil, but they were the lucky ones because as this
oil spread out, the burning suicide flame ignited the fuel and in a short while there was a donut of flames probably a mile wide in diameter and there were men inside these flames yelling for help and we couldn't get through.
We would go up to the flames and have to back off because we were loaded down with fuel and ammunition.
But there were some of the men that had escaped from the Drexler that were in the water nearby, and so we started rescuing these men as we could.
And one of our...
Shumar, the boatswain, he pushed a guy, a couple of the fellows that were near him into the water and he went into the water himself and said, come on, we've got to help those guys, rescue those guys because many of them were in the water without any flotation of any kind.
They were in the water so rapidly
that they didn't have on any life vests or anything of that sort.
So we attempted to get through the flames several different times but were never able to make it.
And these men that had gone into the water were rescuing men as we made attempts.
But finally we were going to make a real
broad attempt and we saw that Shumar was off to the side after he had rescued several men he was holding up a man and the captain through the loudspeaker the bullhorn said called to him and said we're going to attempt to get through the flames again can you hold up the man that you're with and he waved us on
and so we went on towards the flames.
Now the circumstances were that Shumar and I were not real fond of each other and when I saw that he was going to be out there alone there was sort of a transformation that came over me and I became very wary of the fact that I didn't know whether he could hold on or not because I
harkened back to one of the times that I was in the water and had attempted to swim to a plane that was probably less than a mile away.
And I found out that I couldn't swim very far because we weren't in good condition being aboard the ship and not moving and having calisthenics and things of that sort.
So I was very upset and worried about Shumar being in the water and sort of started babbling to myself about the fact that, hang on, Shumar, you old goat, the man that I've hated so long.
And here was the people that were on the conning tower with me.
The conning tower is the top over the bridge.
It's where the captain holds command of the ship, and we were up here, and we were watching Shumar out in the water, so it was sort of, at the same time that it was tragic, it was sort of,
funny that here I was with my enemy and I was babbling to myself, hang on, Shumar, I hope you can make it.
And we weren't able to make it, but we did get back to Shumar and finally picked him up and I felt like he was the bravest man that I had ever known.
He had probably rescued eight to ten men that day and this one man, when he brought him aboard, it made the
119th man that we had rescued from the drugster a fascinating story that you told so well and and i was fortunate enough to know most of that story before you told it because we mentioned that you were a short story writer and you wrote a story that i have here it's called the bravest man i ever knew and it tells the story that you just told specifically about schumar
And to sort of paraphrase a little bit what you said, if you don't mind, I'll read from that.
He said, I was babbling and muttering to myself.
I found myself praying silently, O Lord, please don't let anything happen to this man who I have hated for so long.
And it turns out that you and he obviously became friends because as rough and tough of a guy this guy was, and you even described him as he could be a real jerk,
He ended up being the bravest man you ever knew, and you wrote about him.
Yes, sir.
From the aspect, and your stories are just so incredible, what you put on paper.
I want to, you wrote a short story about the kamikaze pilot.
Yes.
Hajime Fujii.
I want you to talk about that because through your own research, you found out some personal things about him and his family and how he became a kamikaze pilot from being a husband and a father.
Talk briefly about that and the short story that you wrote called Divine Wind.
Well, what happened was that there were some men from the Drexler that had gone to Japan and
they had viewed a statue of Hajime Fuji in the museum that was in Japan, in Tokyo.
And the story goes that Hajime Fuji was a trainer.
He had trained the pilots that were gonna be kamikaze suicide pilots when they were sent towards Okinawa.
And he wanted to be one of them himself.
But because he was a family man and had a family, it was impossible for him to do so.
But his wife was very much a patriot like he himself.
And without Hajime Fuji realizing that his wife was going to do it, she drowned herself in the two children
in a river near Tokyo so that he could be free to go ahead and be a suicide pilot himself.
This is a remarkable story that this man was this patriotic, but yet it is a true story so far as we know.
As a matter of fact, my brother has gotten recent verification that
verifies this more.
He's gone online and in the web that he was using, he was able to verify my story.
And what happened was that after his wife had drowned herself and her two children, why then he petitioned the government to let him be a suicide pilot himself.
And so he formed up what was known as the 45th Squadron
that was to assemble on 27th of May before the next day the 28th when they would get up.
And this is the day of infamy that I have told about that we came upon with the Drexler being suicided on.
And this pilot was the one that was the second suicide plane to suicide into the plane.
You can tell
that he was an accomplished pilot because like I have already told, I believe, that he was being chased by the Corsairs.
It looked like he was going to overfly the Drexler and go into the water, but he veered to the left and came up and went down and landed between the stacks on the Drexler.
I want to read a little bit from Divine Wind and how you describe in your writing a little bit of what you've already said, talking about Hajime Fuji.
Ending it all this way would glorify himself forever as a hero, a divine sacrifice for his family, country, his military forbearance, and a divine glorification for the emperor.
He believed in kamikaze.
He did not look at it as suicide.
He believed that any plane used in kamikaze was a blow struck for the glory of his country, something he could die for.
And then, as you said, on December the 15th, 1944, that's when his wife drowned herself and her children with the belief
that their souls would be waiting to join Fuji, their beginning of heaven.
No longer the head of the family, Fuji can now join the Kamikaze Corps.
Yes, sir.
That goes along with what we've always heard about the Japanese thought during the war of fight to the death.
And certainly fascinating stories in the way you've written them, not only about the bravest man you ever knew, but
actually researching and finding more about Hajime Fuji.
Just fascinating.
Let's rewind and go back and talk a little bit about your early time in the service.
You started off in the Navy.
Yes, sir.
17 years old.
You needed your father's signature.
And talk about how that led to you losing the only $20 you had in your pocket.
Well, I...
I was at Glenmore, Louisiana which was about 28 miles to Alexandria.
And Alexandria was the place that we were to go and be sworn in and then go on down to New Orleans for our physical examination.
And my father had signed my papers since I was only 17 as Dwight and Davis and when we got to
Alexandria and I turned in the papers why they said he has when you're 17 he can't use our initial it has to be Newton right and there were four or five other fellows that were from Glenmore that we wanted to be together during boot camp so I took a taxi and drove went the 28 miles to
get to my father to have him rewrite in and sign it as Newton so that I could go with the gang.
And it took the $20 that I had with me to make that trip.
So I had to go to boot camp from New Orleans without any money.
Went to boot camp in San Diego.
Yes.
You went into service school, sent you to Navy quartermaster school where in the Navy quartermaster that meant navigation and signaling.
And you learned a lot of great things there and that led you to a great career first off in the Navy.
I want you to talk about, this is fascinating to me also, your service stateside where you were on LCTs
in New York on the Niagara River, across the Erie Canal?
At North Tonawanda, New York, there was a shipbuilding plant, and they made LCTs, landing craft tanks.
And when they got one ready and painted, we would bring it down the Niagara River and into the Erie Canal and across the Finger Lakes and down the Hudson to New York City.
And we would usually be at New York City for two or three days and then take the train back to North Tonawanda, New York and do this over again.
And I did that for about six months and then they sent us to St.
Louis and we would bring ships down the tributaries to the Mississippi.
Like once we made a trip from Kansas City down to Missouri, down in the Mississippi, down to New Orleans, we would
bring ships all the way from Pittsburgh as a matter of fact down the Ohio and down the Mississippi and down to New Orleans.
And it was a fascinating trip and I had been in Louisiana before I went in the Navy at Glenmore, Louisiana.
And so sometimes I could see friends of mine that were from high school days when I got to New Orleans.
It was also fascinating in the way that these were the same routes that Mark Twain would make when he was on the Mississippi.
And it sort of made me fashion myself as being like Mark Twain because we would have a pilot that would come board the ship and tell me where to steer.
so that we would miss the bad spots.
There were times when we got grounded and we had to work our ways out and this made it more fascinating.
And this was a very charming and delightful way to spend my time.
We saw a photograph a moment ago.
Maybe we can put it back on the screen.
This was actually a photograph of, not the one you were on, but a depiction, there it is right there, of an LCS.
This is what we talked about that you were involved, that you were on during the invasion of Okinawa, landing craft support.
This is much like that.
The LCS is much like an LCI.
And when we were going down the...
tributaries to the Mississippi, we would bring LCI's many times down the river.
Sometimes LSTs, landing ship tanks, which were the big 350-foot amphibious craft.
And also, we would sometimes tie together several LCTs, landing craft tanks, and take them down the rivers down to New Orleans.
Not a very large ship, this landing craft, 158 feet in length, about 28 feet wide, and on that you fit six officers and 65 enlisted men.
That's the one that we went to Okinawa on.
Right, with Okinawa.
I want to move on.
After World War II, like we said in the beginning, you came home to Giddings, you finished high school, you went to college at Texas Lutheran College, and then on to Southwest Texas State.
And then you went to med school at UT Galveston.
And eventually to Vietnam.
And I want to go ahead and get there.
I know that you became a flight surgeon at Fort Sill.
Vietnam in 1967 and 1968 as a doctor there.
Talk a little bit about that experience.
Obviously, you saw a lot of images, a lot of the horror of war that you'll never forget.
Well, actually...
I felt very good about Vietnam.
I was able to, and I had two jobs.
I was both the division surgeon and I was the battalion commander of the medical battalion and under my command I had four clearing companies and a helicopter medevac ambulance detachment.
Since I had learned to fly before I got to the division, the chief of staff found out about it and told the medevac detachment commander, whenever the doc's in your plane, let him be your co-pilot.
And so we got around a lot.
And I had a very good year in Vietnam.
And like I said, I had a smart and
diligent, gung-ho group of young doctors and when we first got there, one of the problems was what they called wet lung syndrome.
The patients were going to the surgical hospitals and they would operate on them before they resuscitated them and the
injured would go in shock while they were on the operating table and it would have the fluids back up into the lungs and that's the reason they called it wet lung syndrome.
So our doctors and I worked out this system that when our medevac helicopters picked up an injured, we would not take them immediately to the
surgical hospitals.
We would bring them to our own aid stations and we would do four cut downs.
We would do one on each limb and on two of the limbs we would run in whole blood and then on the other two limbs we would run in ringers lactate which is a substitute for blood whenever we don't have enough blood and so
This worked very well and we would bring the patients around and they could then go on to the surgical hospitals and we found that in this fashion that wet lung syndrome went away and many of the surrounding divisions
caught on to what we were doing and they began to emphasize resuscitating the patient before they were sent to the surgical hospitals.
So essentially you were developing methods of saving lives that otherwise may have been lost.
Yes, it's a very interesting situation.
One night we were coming back from Fontiette and we were probably 50, 60 miles from our home base when they
radioed us and said that there was a casualty en route and as a matter of fact it must have been just almost directly below us and so we landed and
I picked up the man and examined him and I could find no pulse, no blood pressure.
His eyes were rolled back in his head and I, for all circumstances, he appeared to be dead.
But we radioed ahead and they were ready for us.
And when we landed, it was like a beehive of activity.
They had the man, they gave him the four cut downs and resuscitated him.
And in less than five minutes, they had him sitting up and while they were suctioning blood off of his chest, he was fighting them.
And so it was a remarkable event that was very gratifying to me to see what we had accomplished.
And we saw this young man go on to the surgical hospital and recuperate and live.
I want to mention you were commander of your medical battalion in Vietnam.
We've just got a couple of minutes left after Vietnam.
You went to the Middle East, Africa.
You went to jump school.
You actually have 65 jumps to your credit.
Yes.
That's part of the adventure in you.
You wanted more adventure, so you decided to learn how to jump out of perfectly good airplanes.
I did that beforehand, yeah, before I ever went through training.
Right.
Talk about, just in the minute or so we have, what led you to now.
You went to Brook Army Medical Center, and then you went out to California and practiced for 20 years, and now you've been in Bryan College Station area for four years.
Tell people what you're doing right now, sort of in semi-retirement.
I work with a lady that does urine drug tests and blood alcohol tests.
We work for various firms like Halliburton and Knife River, large trucking firms.
And so I do the physical examinations for the bus drivers and truck drivers that they employ.
And this keeps my hand in and it's very interesting work.
I'm also the medical review officer that whenever there is a positive
urine drug found, they send it to me and I interview the patient and find out if he has a valid prescription that would account for his having
the positive test.
All right.
Thank you for your service.
We're out of time, but thank you for what you do.
It's a pleasure to know you.
This is one of those stories of service that could fill volumes, and through his love of writing, Rex Davis' experiences in service to his country will be there for us to read forever.
But you get the idea that he'll be around to write a lot more.
We salute Dr. Rex Davis.
I'm Tom Turbeville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.